Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
to the MG by Doctor Stefan Ziroans. He is
professor of European intellectual history at New York University,
and today we're talking about his book, The Invention
of Prehistory, Empire, Violence and Our Obsession with Human
Origins. So, Doctor Glenz, welcome to the show. It's
a huge pleasure to everyone.
The pleasure is all mine, Mr. Lopez. Thank you.
So, let me start by asking you
then,
when did we become interested in pre-history, at least
in the
West. So I, I tend to think that this
happens at, at multiple stages, the different stops, if
you will. Uh, THERE'S a very clear moment in,
in the 18th century. I wouldn't even call it
a moment, it's a gradual realization. And then there
are, again, particularly significant periods in the 1860s. And
then again in the post-war period. And you can
see why at these times. The, the book basically
argues that the early stages around 1750 and that
it's linked in part to uh Jean-Jacques Rousseau. And
I do this for a particular reason, which is
to say that it's not that people weren't concerned
with what they saw as early humans before, that
is to say, with indigenous people whom they described
as savages or Uh, barbarians. But it is that
up to that point, there was a kind of
almost religious and classical logic. These are peoples who
exist. Where in the past are they? They're not
like us, quote unquote, we are civilized and they
are savages. And the real question at that point
with Rousseau becomes that Rousseau switches it around and
suggests that they are, that their state of nature
is much closer to the original human state. Um,
THAN, than, than modern civilized people, uh, would be.
That inversion for me is Uh, is very important
because it suggests that now you can have a
competition. It's not simply that people look to imagine
what the past looked like, but now you can
have competing theories, and Rousseau is a good stand-in
for the competing theories about early humanity as, as
well as about uh indigenous peoples. In the 1860s,
prehistory becomes a sort of a discipline, and that's
partly linked to um Charles Darwin, but it's also
linked to people like John Lubbock. Um, AND Charles
Lyell. Um, Darwin's, uh, first famous work on the
Origin of Species says very little about humans, but
implies a lot. This became something of a debate.
Uh, AND parallel to it, the logic developed that
we needed to be able that, that the English
and the Europeans needed to be able to compare.
What they found in archaeological dig sites with peoples
existing elsewhere in the world, peoples that um the
British and others were uh still colonizing. In the
third stage of this, and so, and that's really,
Lubbock is really treated as somehow having founded a
field, very discreet and specific. In the post-war period,
partly because of the rejection of Nazi racism and
anti-Semitism, partly because separately, Um, the question continued, where
is it that humans are coming from if the
old racial ideas are not the way to understand
it. Uh, THE new questions develop and at the
same time, a far larger infrastructure for studying, um,
you know, sites that could and turn out to
be archaeological sites, particularly in Africa. So on the
one hand, you have organizations like UNESCO who are
very much opposed. TO racism, and who are very
much invested in trying to understand what early humanity
um would have looked like or in supporting questions
of like, how, how is humanity a single species
in which we are all equal. Uh, AND at
the same time, you have a new infrastructure basically,
that people are now studying in multiple sites across
Africa, uh, as well as in multiple sites across
Southeast Asia, East Asia and Southeast Asia. Um, AND
then eventually also in, in Latin America. So it's
as though the field expands dramatically because it has
something to say about the past and something to
say about the future. Um, IT'S that idea that
we have something to say. About the future that
begins with our earliest past that remains really important
today.
Why do you call prehistory an invention in the
book? In what ways is it an invention?
So, I, I want to be clear, I'm not
using the term invention in a straight up pejorative
fashion that would say that it's not real. Uh.
It's to say that the way that we understand
prehistory, the way we understand human origins, is much
more filled with speculation than we would like to
believe. And yet we make assertions about it that,
you know, pretend to be very exact. Uh, THIS
is to say that there is very serious and
very good science, yes. But parallel to that science,
we tend to fill things, fill things in, and
this has been happening for the last couple of
100 years. Uh, AND it continues to happen now.
So, this, uh, very often, the more popular accounts
of human prehistory, often written by scientists as well,
they're basically filled in with details that are speculative
details. They are details where we're guessing. I have
absolutely no problem when somebody is saying, well, here's
a guess, but it really is a guess. Nevertheless,
a lot of the time, that's not the language
in which things are written. They're written in the
language, um, of, you know, here's what we know,
and what we know is that people would have
lived like this or like that. And these, this
involves a lot more filling in than I would
be comfortable with.
Uh, WHAT are the theories of our past shaped
by? What factors play a role in them?
So, uh, you know, this is, this is, this
is a really tricky question, and the book doesn't
actually answer it in, in full. Uh, A lot
of it is based on, so some of it
is based on the evidence that we have, and
the types of evidence that we have. Um, THAT
is to say, are we looking at, uh, skulls
and bones? Are we looking at linguistic artifacts? Are
we looking at tools? Are we looking Uh, at,
you know, particular building sites, are we looking at
things people wore? So there are multiple types of,
of physical, archaeological, you know, uh, zoanthropological, uh, evidence,
and these get to be studied and pursued and,
and, uh, in detail. That's one side. The second
side of this is that, um, A lot that
goes into each study has to do with how
scientists write grants, uh, how we all write grant
applications. We, when we write grant applications, we explain
how it is that we're going to solve a
bigger problem than we're usually capable of, um, solving
or at least we explain multiple extra points that
this will, uh, go in. I think it is
there that a lot of speculation walks right in
and um that can involve Ideas that we believe
in, ideologies that we've been raised in, words that
we don't understand, or that we do understand, but
whose implications we don't take fully into account. That
side, I think, is one of the more important
pressures that we, we, we find ourselves confronting. So,
You know, and so, so then you begin to
ask yourself, where is it that we are, uh,
what is it that we're looking at exactly? Are
we looking at the evidence before us? Are we
looking at the way that we articulate, uh, what
it is that How to put it? Are we
looking at the way that, that, that we articulate
the goals of our study? Are we looking at
political ideas that we have been raised in? Are
we looking at things that it is that we
oppose? There's also competing theories at every point in
time. It is not like there ever was a
single theory of prehistory. Uh, THERE are competing ones
and these are, are fighting against each other. People
who write grants write, write them for themselves as
opposed to for other um competing approaches. And then
there's the language. The language is the trickiest part.
And this book really is a kind of history
of a language about talking about the past and
how particular expressions and words ended up competing. Mhm.
So we, you start the book by talking about
how the depiction of Neanderthals has changed over the
past few decades. Tell us about that also because
I think it's a very illustrative example of what
you explore in the book. And what does it
say about how we deal with our prehistory?
Right. So when, you know, when I was growing
up, uh, we We repeatedly uh shown on television
and books, and newspapers and, you know, the replication
of old images and so on. The Neanderthal is,
you know, just a step above the gorilla. Um,
HAIRY, dark-skinned, with a kind of, uh, you know,
bent over, uh, bent over, um, you know, stances.
Um, THE Neanderthal was a figure who is capable
of some sort of semi-human behavior, but is really,
really left behind. Sapiens were so much better. They
arrived, they, you know, took Europe by storm and,
and so on and so forth. Now, that set
of ideas was already largely obsolete in the science.
People did know that Neanderthals were not nearly as
hunched over, incapable of, of coping with the environment,
um, weak in the, in the face of the
elements. But we continue to see that, and some
of those images continue to this day. In the
last 20 years, these images have flipped completely. Uh,
NOW, reconstructions of Neanderthals present them as quite white,
uh, with no really different hair than, um, than,
than sapiens. Um, YOU know, humans are wearing clothes.
Uh, AND to have elaborate trade networks and elaborate,
um, you know, rituals for hunting and for, for
living. That's which You know, the, the point is,
the point, uh, uh, that I'm very interested in
is how is it that the look of the
Neanderthal and their standing changes so dramatically. In the
worst of cases, the idea that Neanderthals are blonde,
blue-eyed, and so on, translates quite easily. Into far
right politics. They were somehow Europe's original inhabitants, and
uh kind of quote unquote white genocide took them
out. Um, SO that scenario, you know, doesn't seem
to have uh much basis in reality that was
much debated, the extinction of the Neanderthals is much
debated. Uh, BUT what I'm very, very interested in
is that sense that the image changes and the
capacities change at a certain moment where a lot
of it may come from again, material evidence, but
a lot of it comes from, hey, now we
can identify with this figure. We're not simply seeing
them as subhuman. But as parahuman, as competing with
sapiens in this, in this story. That became for
me a really uh interesting way of abbreviating massive
changes of perceiving other species of the genus Homo,
um, as well as other ideas about who it
is that, that we aren't and who it is
that we are.
So in the book, you talk a lot about
how our understanding of pre-history, I mean, the ways
it has been shaped, uh, it has, it has
been shaped in a way by the expansion of
European colonization, contact with other peoples, studying the natural
man, the State of nature. And then, of course,
uh things like the rise of racism using words
like primitive and savage applied to other peoples. So,
could you tell us a little bit about that
and also how the rise of the concept of
civilization occurred?
Right. Um, Let me see how to, to abbreviate
your question because this is, this is a very
difficult and big one. ALREADY from Uh, already from
the 16th century, there are elaborate debates about where
it is that non-Europeans, uh, are, are to be
found. Who is it that peoples who have been
recently discovered, or who are now discovered, um, who
don't seem to fit, uh, in the Hebrew Bible,
uh, belong, or as a European saw it in
the Old Testament as they would have referred to
it, uh, belong. How do we understand how they
ended up where they ended up? So those sorts
of studies proceed and parallel studies of early humanity,
any attempt to understand early humanity. By the 18th
century, a concept of civilization are playing out, not
least in competition with India and China and, and
ideological competition, let's say with India and China, but
also sometimes in celebration, uh, of, of, of other
cultures. What becomes really Interesting is that as you,
as you noted, as European colonization expands, this becomes
a sort of linear story. We become able, we,
uh, quote unquote, become able to say like, look,
we are the most advanced, and we can start
putting everybody else somewhere in, you know, the, the,
somewhere further back in history. History is a linear
progress of some sort, and from the earliest to
the present, Um, times we would be able to
put other people as belonging there. That cre uh
helps create a distinction between, not only between savage
and civilized, but between savage barbarian and civilized, which
is, it's a kind of three-stage scenario. The, you
know, the lowest of the low are savage, the,
the, the ones who have escaped from a savage
setup are barbarians who may be both ferocious, but
also there might be a little bit of a
description of how we came to be who we
are. Whenever I say we, I don't mean you,
you know, we, I mean people thinking about themselves.
Um, IN this period. So, that distinction of savage,
barbarian, and civilized is quite convenient, uh, in the
19th century, because everybody who would use it would
identify themselves as civilized as opposed to everybody else
that they would, uh, wish to compete with. That
becomes a major, um, concern, and the question of
on what grounds or how is it? That these
developments took place. Those questions become pressing questions across
a series of disciplines, but also uh across international
politics as well. So on the one hand, uh,
you can say Europeans confronted their own idea about
themselves, um, by describing themselves in better terms than,
than the peoples that they were in contact with,
or the peoples they lowered over. And at the
same time, they begin to ask on what grounds
did this kind of change and development take place?
Did it happen because of something innate, something natural?
Did it happen? Because of some sort of, you
know, capacity to build superior, uh, tools, so the
shift from, let's say, the Stone Age to the
the uh the Bronze Age to the Iron Age,
or did it happen for other reasons as well?
That scenario is the part that becomes uh really
key because there, Europeans come to debate whether they
really um are fundamentally racially or culturally different. And
in what ways they would, you know, um, they
can be in genuine contact with the people that
they, uh, that they're interacting with. That scenario also
becomes part of the history of racism, um, not
simply because of this distinction between savage civil rights
and so on and so forth, um, but also
because it begins to power different ideas about human
nature. That is to say, how you produce these
distinctions between You know, one, you know, one, let's
say, ethnic or national, uh, or cultural or linguistic
group and another, these begin to harden, uh, very,
very, very Intensely. Uh, AND so much of the
history of prehistory, the book argues, is a history
of how these distinctions took place, and how these
distinctions came to power subsequent research, you know, for
how these, whether they were speculative or not, by
the way. Um, SO how it is that the
British came to believe in their own superiority, came
to contribute to a system of international politics in
which to be a proper state, you have to
be civilized as opposed to others who do not
have rights. Uh, TO international legal personhood. Um, AND
at the same time, how it is that you
understand the superiority or this difference from others that
you, that you believe you're experiencing or you believe
you are uh living with. It's a bit of
a long answer, but I think you, you see
where I'm going with it.
Yes, uh, and in regards to the expansion of
European colo colonization and the contact with other peoples,
when and how were indigenous peoples primitivized and turned
into living representatives of the first humans?
Well, a version of this. It's already clear in
the 18th century. That is to say, when uh
Rousseau refers to quote unquote, the Carib as uh
existing very close to the original state of, of,
uh of nature, um, that is, you know, it's
already certainly there. Um, OTHER versions of the problem
exist so much earlier, that is to say, with
the colonization of the Americas, um, theological debates are
raging whether, you know, native peoples are basically some
rendition, um, of, you know, people's, um, after the
fall of, of Babylon, or do they, um, of
the Tower of Babylon, or is, uh, sorry, of
the Tower of Babel, um, my brain is kind
of um freezing for a second. Um, IS, are
these peoples before or after the fall of the
Tower of people and where exactly would they belong
in this, in this story? So where is it
that they got stopped, or that their transformation stopped?
It's in that um construction of the deep, of,
of a deep past of a kind of early
humanity that this is already there. Now, that scenario
plays out again and again, but it plays out
around different languages. So, In a way, the language
of primitive is a very 19th century language. That's
it, the, the term primitive, uh, really begins and
it means, you know, people who are primal, people
who are, are closer to the original condition, but
also people who are uncouth, ungrown, you know, we
have not developed a culture who are savage. That's
the terms of primitive, and those are very common
in the 19th and in the 20th century. Um.
It's a term that is, that is now regarded
as obsolete, but that really wasn't the case before
1980, even 1990. Um, BUT the thing is that
this kind of primitivization, if you will, also translates
into other languages. So, as indigenous peoples are being
wiped out, partly by Europeans, partly by diseases, partly
because their ways of life. Uh, GET destroyed and
they have, they're forced to adapt to different kind
of social pressures from the, the, from the outside.
Um, As, uh, indigenous peoples are Effectively destroyed, Europeans
begin to discuss with them, to discuss them as
disappearing, um, and Americans. These are disappearing natives is
the, the expression. And so the implication there as
well, if they do disappear, it isn't really a
great loss. They're further back, they're kind of a
loss. Well, it's not very nice that they're quote
unquote, disappearing, but it's not really a problem for,
for the moderns. That scenario is quite Uh, present
in the later 19th and the first half of
the 20th century. And in some respects, we even
to this day, people speak of uncontacted tribes, um,
as though there's a kind of world out there
that's just, you know, not really, um, doesn't really
belong somehow in the modern world and doesn't have
a different, uh, scenario to, to, to live in.
There are other expressions. The book spends quite some
time tracking this idea of the savage beneath the
thin veneer of civilization. Um, WHICH is to say
an idea that, you know, within each of us,
there exists some sort of primal savage, uh, who
is ready to, you know, explode in aggression and
violence and, um, who is, you know, has, uh,
is, is merely just slightly hidden by the trappings
of civilization. Um, THERE are other languages that take
off in the 19th century as well and that
are just as important, the idea that the psyche.
Is perhaps, uh, carrying the entire history of humanity
within it. And what does it mean for that
to, um, to be the case. So, it's not
simply that people believed in one idea around human
prehistory, and they sort of left it at that.
Uh, IT'S that, rather, they developed multiple languages, and
they could speak one or speak the other. They
could easily switch into one, a kind of, um,
fantasy of a Tarzan. Um, SCENARIO that they would
then project back into the past, or other cases
where they would speak like, well, it's, it's really
terrible what, what's happened to indigenous peoples. But, you
know, uh, society, uh, let's say, society requires, they
thought, um, eugenic transformation. And so it's not a
surprise that other peoples would disappear. Um, I don't
like repeating some of this language because this is
something that Um, is, is, of course, you know,
not very far from a certain kind of racism
that exists today as well. But this is very
much the way in the way in people, in
which people, uh, thought and, and, and argued. And
part of the goal of the book is to
kind of show what an ugly history some of
these expressions have, uh, and in some occasions, what
an interesting history, some other occasion, some other expressions
have as well. Mhm.
So, in regards to our prehistory, we also tend
to talk about a human nature. Uh, TELL us
about how the debate surrounding human nature informs and
serves political debates like the ongoing one between socialists
and capitalists and perhaps, uh, whether these kinds of
debates also and the motivations behind them also shape
our understanding of prehistory.
So, um, Let me, let me give a little
vignette as a, as a way of handling that.
Um, IN the 1860s and 1870s, uh, there are
multiple debates playing out, uh, among socialist thinkers, both
in Europe and in America, regarding the question of,
uh, was there ever a kind of primitive communism?
This is even before Marx begins to take notes.
Uh, ON, on anthropological subjects and before Engels takes
Marx's notes and prepares the origin of the family,
private property in the state. Um, YOU know, is
there, is there a pre-capitalist human nature, which was
distorted by capitalism? That, uh, debate is played out
rather lightly, uh, and it begins to use anthropological
studies. Um, SCHOLARS or intellectuals and, and politicians begin
to use anthropological studies to answer the question. Then
Engels comes in, publishes um, The Origin of the
Family. Private property in the state in which he
uses the anthropological work of uh Henry Louis Morgan.
Um, IN which Morgan argued that originally societies either
shared property and, you know, had no sense of
ownership in the sense of, uh, in, in the
modern sense, or if they had a sense of
ownership, this descended, uh, through the mother, uh, from
mother to daughter to daughter, granddaughter, and so on.
Um, Engels argues that uh Morgan, Engels follows Morgan,
who says, well, we can't actually see that in
any currently existing societies, but we can see leftovers
of that kind of social organization in the way
that families are set up and in the way
that language is organized. And Engels goes, Aha, this
is to indicate that when Um, when Men realized.
The significance of technological innovation and their capacity to
claim land and and objects for themselves, that was
in a way a kind of first birth of
capitalism. And that indicates to him that ownership, the
creation of private property, is both important for the
shaping of the family. And also important for a
way of giving up on some sort of pre-capitalist
natural state for human beings. Now, that debate, as
you indicated, becomes a major human nature debate that
continues into the 20th century. We like to think
that, you know, we just think about prehistory ideas
randomly, right? But the idea of primitive communism. Uh,
BECOMES a matter of much debate both in the
West and in the last debate, in this case
in the Soviet Union. The Stalin constitution of 1936
enshrines primitive communism as the original state of mind.
Um, AND whereas in the West, uh, socialists have
to confront the Attack, let's say, that their ideas
are unnatural, that they're trying to distort modern society
through fundamentally unnatural ways of, uh, of living. And
they proceed similarly to our, you know, in fact,
we are the natural ones. It's not modern, modern
capitalist society that is our, our natural condition. You'll
recall, for example, that from Adam Smith to today,
there is an argument about how the market really
works, about what nature is like, about what human
nature is like. So that debate plays itself out,
um, in this, in the sense, a lot of
the time people don't actually directly argue about it,
but they will say, your ideas are unnatural, and
the back and forth would, uh, would begin again.
Now, the ideas of primitive communism are largely left
aside by anthropologists. They're not taken seriously after a
certain point. Even among those anthropologists who have a
kind of emotional attachment. Uh, LET'S say, or a
kind of profound empathy towards indigenous peoples. Uh, Claude
Levisjos famously sees the nambicuara, uh, in Brazil and
describes the nambicuara of Brazil as, you know, the
closest, um, to a kind of threatened original, uh,
human nature that survives now, but survives, you know,
without writing, without violence, without power. Um, AND for
him, it becomes really important to say, look at
how much we have distorted the world, and we've
made it impossible to get out of these gigantic
cities and these overwhelming, um, cultural and technological powers.
But there is a kind of other way of
life. We can't go to it, but that way
of life also exists and we're wiping it out.
So even though the idea of primitive communism effectively,
on the one hand, gets, you know, uh, becomes
obsolete, on the other hand, except for, you know,
um, people are really like eco eco-anarchists of some
sort. Um The or an anarcho-primitivist of some sort,
uh, the, the idea of a kind of attachment
to particular peoples who belong in a fundamentally different
way to this earth than we do. This becomes
a hit in the 70s and 80s as well.
There's a kind of like the, the, the, the,
the pure authentic Indian idea uh that, that, that
plays out, who's a great tracker, who has a
real relationship to To the world and so on.
That scenario becomes a kind of a dream of
its own. So these, again, these are ideas that
on the one hand, whether they succeed or they,
they fail, they also tend to translate. Even when
they fail, they tend to translate into other ideas
that then get picked up, perhaps a little bit
more softly than the, the, the harder expressions, let's
say.
Uh, FOCUSING a little bit on the 20th century,
these ideas about our human past also play a
role in eugenics.
Yes, absolutely. Absolutely. You need to think of eugenics,
um, first off, as a series of, you know,
basically aesthetic ideas. Uh, IT'S uh a mixture, it's
aesthetic ideas with a kind of moral fantasy, uh,
attached to them. That is to say, uh, Throughout
the better part of the 20th century, the only
technology for eugenics was to effectively uh remove people,
and I want that to sound as violent as,
as, as it was from a gene pool, from
the capacity to uh have children. So it was
either by uh extermination, uh, or by castration, usually
chemical. Um, AND, uh, the The idea in many
respects was that Um, There's a kind of impending
threat, a looming threat, either on a particular section
of society or on society in general. And people
who are either cognitively disabled or who are racially
distinct needed to be removed, supposedly, from society, um,
so for the, for its own future. Now, that
kind of threat is an aesthetic threat. Nobody had
Uh, the tools to, or nobody has any sort
of tools. It's a, it's a, it's an ideological
decision. And all of these scenarios played with multiple
ideas of prehistory. First off, are we, uh, the
old debate, is this a monogynistic, um, uh, species,
or are there multiple human species within? That polygenism,
one which uh Darwin, for example, uh rejects, persists
in many ways, certainly through Nazism. Um, SO, there,
there's one distinction, but also you could say in
segregationist societies as well, where there's a hard distinction
that unless you keep that, um, distinction between Uh,
racial groups, absolute, uh, you, you're going to undo
some A, B, or COD or whatever. Um, THOSE
ideas very much rely on a kind of original
nature of us scenario. That's what I meant by
aesthetic before. It's like, we the beautiful, they the
ugly, we must, uh, produce this kind of separation
and turn it into a moral and a political
imperative. That's what eugenics ultimately is, uh, and the
same would continue into Uh, some of that would
continue into the present day. It's this idea that
you can mark, uh, hard distinctions between different groups
of people on the basis of whether you see
them as healthy or as, uh, or as, you
know, unhealthy, um, and then to produce a fantasy
of the future. In which fantasy, only you win
out. That scenario is the part that is, is
among the most odious forms and precisely because of
its capacity to hide in other languages. Uh, AND
to pretend that there's a kind of grand moral
imperative to do A or B or C, uh,
for the survival of the species, blah, blah, blah.
All of that stuff is among the most dangerous
that's, uh, that's out there. In all of this,
the idea that a certain original human nature, an
original character of a race, an original character of
a supposedly superior class, blah, blah, blah, all of
that stuff um plays in, and these ideas about
Of, you know, purity and authenticity at one level
versus a destitution or a strength. All of this
language linked to the idea of what, uh, a
kind of deep human past of, quote unquote, us,
that's where uh that links in because people then
proceed to speak of how Uh, humanity would have
gotten to where it is, what its benefits are,
what its strengths are, what the supposed dangers of
modern society are, and accordingly, they look into the
future as a story of rise or as a
story of decline, as a story of purity or
as a story of degeneration. So, eugenics has been
absolutely attached. Um, TO, uh, to the, the, the,
um, to the story of human origins. Never more
so even than in the Nazi case. Uh, National
Socialist, um, intellectuals in Germany, if we can call
them that, um, very much insisted, starting from Hitler,
that Aryans and Samites were fundamentally different. Uh, RACISM
and that they were essentially opposed and, and forever,
um, in conflict. Part of the great, um, theory
that he tried to build is precisely that there
is an argument, sorry, let me just rephrase that
sentence. Hitler's theory was that there is uh a
distinction, uh, that has to do with racial self-consciousness.
Uh, SUPPOSEDLY for him, Aryans would, uh, get more
powerful when they became racially conscious. And this had
been a history of all of Aryan humanity since
the beginning. That was the Hitler, um, uh, position.
It's in Mein Kampf, and then it played out
sometimes, uh, in very similar terms, sometimes in somewhat
more different terms across other uh racial theorists in,
in Nazi Germany. Uh, THE implication of that, of
course, was that racial self-consciousness was supposedly essential for
the survival of Germany now, and that unless, uh,
you know, the, supposedly the German people were self-conscious
of their racial origins of the and their racial
destiny, they would be swamped, uh, and they would
lose to the supposedly Semitic. Uh, ELEMENTS in their
society. That's like at the heart of Nazi anti-Semitism.
Uh, THERE'S, there's, there's no way, uh, of, of,
of, uh, of missing it, even if at times
it is expressed under somewhat different, uh, somewhat different
terms. So I think it's really important to see
that there Uh, Nazism uses that harsh distinction, and
then proceeds to guide it with a supposed moral
panic into an argument of we the beautiful and
they in the extermination camp.
When it comes
to yeah, sorry, hence the eugenic uh plan.
Right. When it comes to disseminating ideas surrounding our
prehistory, why we should care about our human past
and how we should think about it, what do
you make of the impact of popular books like,
for example, Yuval Noah Harari's sapiens,
right? So these are books that since the 1950s.
Um, uh, Erika Mailla has a great book called
Creatures of Cain, which is very much about the
invention of the scientific paperback, let's say. So it's
the moment when paperbacks begin to take over. And
so already from the 1950s with Robert Ay's um
African Genesis, all the way to Yuval Harari's sapiens,
these popular uh arguments about where we come from
and who we are and where we are going
to go. Um. Have been, uh, have been very
successful, as you noted. You could even actually say
that the original of this, uh, was Orson Orson.
uh HG Wells is the outline of history. Um,
SO, why, uh, what do we make of this?
One version is that it fits with a certain
kind of public need. It's as though we all
need for a bedtime story version of where we
come from and what our future is like. These
books typically say something in terms uh that feels
surprising on you. And in the case of Harari,
this was a certain kind of, you know, Creativity
story. Uh, IN, in Audrey's case, uh, it was
much more a story about human violence and the
almost ingrained quality of human violence and the difficulty
of, of, of, you know, covering that violence with
civilization. Uh BUT it, it, you know, so that,
this was an explanation in the 50s of the
Holocaust of violence uh across the world of, of
ongoing wars and so on. In Yuvalhari's case, it's
an argument about creativity. It's that we are fundamentally
creative beings who project, have the capacity to project
ideas and then share them and uh insofar as
we can share them, we can imagine, we can
create shared futures. Now, This, of course, relies on
minimal evidence and very much ideology. It's like a
kind of PowerPoint generation, um fantasy of where it
is that we are, where it is that we're
going to, to, to go. But precisely because they
can offer A grand narrative about us as human
beings. These books are almost primed to be super
successful. Um, A much better version, you know, far
superior in my opinion, version than the Harari argument
is the David Graber and David Wengro, um, position
regarding, you know, the book, the, the Dawn of
Everything. And yet, that book too is full of
speculation and fantasy. That book two just can't help
itself but make an argument about who we are
as humans and how we are, you know, essentially.
Uh, YOU know, near anarchic as, as humans that
are at a, at a most basic, um, character.
I think that that all is basically mythmaking. Uh,
WE all need certain kinds of myths to live,
and these books are myths about what humanity is,
about how we are good or pure or wonderful,
or this or that, or how we imagine ourselves
as striving, as moving forward, and so on. Um,
SO, there are better and worse myths. Uh, THAT'S
for sure, but at the same time, this becomes,
I think, very dangerous territory and basically fantasy rather
than um, than enlightenment.
How does some of these translate into claims about
how we should live our present life? So, like
when people claim that we should follow our human
nature or that there is a human nature we
cannot get past and so on.
Right. I mean, part one, there is no such
thing as human nature. Uh, IT'S been two centuries
now that people have been trying to determine it,
uh, to find it in, in, in, in some
sort of node or some particular setup. Uh, BUT
there is no plausible concept that is going to
satisfy nor a discrete concept. That is going to
satisfy more than a few people at a time
on the basis of, you know, of, of, of
other reasons, political, ideological, philosophical, and so on and
so forth. Um, THERE is also, it's important to
note, no concept of human nature that has been
very clear and discrete in scientific studies of prehistory.
It is very, very difficult to decide at what
point. Human nature begins, or at what point human
nature stops? Are we talking about language? Are we
talking about toolmaking? Are we talking about certain biological
characteristics? What biological characteristics as opposed to others? What
linguistic element as opposed to, to others. The result
is that this stuff just gets really very dangerous.
So at the very fundamental level, Uh, I'm, you
know, one of the reasons for writing this book
is to emphasize that that concept is both profoundly
outdated. Uh, YOU know, really a kind of 18th
to 19th century construct, and one that no longer
helps move toward any version of equality. People who
appeal to human nature most of the time are
not there to say, here's multiple possibilities, here's infinite
possible futures, or, you know, here's a kind of
very thin understanding of human nature. The point is,
usually, like, here's a very strict sense of like,
here's what's possible and what's not. What do we
make of these appeals? It's very difficult to figure
it out. And, in brief, I think it's the
kind of concept where the moment somebody uh appeals
to it, Our obligation, at least the scholars and
intellectuals, is to just say, where is this coming
from? Where is this going? Is this a particular
religious argument? Is this a particular, you know, vision
of what secular uh life is supposed to, to
look like? What does it say about us as
technological, uh, beings? What does it say about us
as, you know, people who live in an extraordinarily
complex society. Um, SO one of the key arguments
of the book is against any such understanding. It
isn't because of any human nature or because of
where we come from, where Human origins Um, have
gone from the past to the present. Those aren't
the reasons that we live as we, we live.
Uh, YOU know, I think I've, I've, I've noted
this in the book and probably um said this
somewhere before. But we are a society where most,
uh, of the things that we consume, we live
in societies where most of the things that we
consume come from very, very far away, uh, require
elaborate trading networks, require elaborate Um, you know, flows
of money require very expensive and often very destructive,
uh, or extractive, if you prefer, uh, ways of
handling the earth. Um, WE, we're speaking of societies
in which people live in cities in the millions,
something that certainly never existed at any, um, but,
you know, up to a certain point and, and,
and time certainly it never existed. So these appeals
to nature are basically fantasy. And they're part of
a fantasy that, you know, maybe helps some people
sleep well at night. Uh, BUT I think for
the most part, are much more, um, appropriate, let's
say, for oppressive purposes rather than for, uh, a
kind of possibility. Mhm.
So, I have one last question then. Uh, WHEN
it comes to these different accounts of our origins
and our past, some of them are non-scientific, but
I also understand that, uh, others have been put
forth by scientists themselves and Even nowadays, some of
them perhaps are considered scientific. But uh is there
any problem with, for example, anthropologists studying our past?
Uh, IS there any problem with us having a
scientific account of our origins and past?
Yeah, so, no, absolutely no problem. I have, I
have absolutely no problem with that. I think that
that's a perfectly legitimate point of study. Just as
I think that the study of black holes, which,
you know, we're never going to like physically encounter
as human beings, um, are, is is a perfectly
legitimate field of study. I think that sociological, anthropological,
historical, you know, political, scientific and psychological and other
uh researchers are really, really, uh, important, useful and
interesting and that absolutely, this is, this is not
problematic. Um, THE point of the book was really
not to say that there's something invented or awful
about this study as such. The point is to
say that the giant drama surrounds it. And that's
the thing that I find very tricky for us
to be able to, uh, to think with. The
aim, I think, from my perspective is to de-dramatize
this kind of situation, is to say that our
purpose as scholars is never to create new gigantic
myths. And the ones who do create gigantic myths
need to be treated with great suspicion. Uh, THE
book ends by noting Uh, with me noting that
when People make arguments that are very skeptical. This
appeals to me, uh, very, very much, not skeptical,
in general, scientifically skeptical. Um, WHEN they work with
the science to say, look, there are multiple possible
answers to this. I'm really not sure exactly what
this is going to be. In a few years,
this scenario might be upturned, will be upturned. And
the point is to study things carefully little by
little, in a way that doesn't necessarily uh make
these grandiose claims. I think that's absolutely fantastic. Uh,
THAT helps us understand little elements of our society
or perhaps important elements of our society, but it
helps us understand them tentatively. The really key part
Is that sense of tentativeness. Uh, THE point of
scientific research is absolutely never to answer a question
once and for all, because then that would exactly
be uh an answer that gets replaced. The problem
with human origins is that, of course, we would
like to have this answer and we'd like to
have it now. And the, the scientific element of
this is to resist these easy answers. Answers like
the, you know, Hararis, who would be like 10
million years ago, this happened and this determines us.
And then 100,000 years ago, we invented cooking, and
that determines, like, that kind of stuff needs to
be treated much more cautiously, uh, and with a,
with a great deal of skepticism at the public
level, and hypotheses need to be put up and
tested. Um, CAUTIOUSLY and with the sense that there's
something about early human life that not a single
discipline is going to be able to answer. I
don't mean that, um, everyone fails on its own.
I just mean to say Anthropologists will be able
to answer to a certain point, and biologists will
be able to answer to a certain point, and
so on and so forth. These answers do not
need to give us a complete picture. I know
that we would love a complete picture, but that
complete picture will always be wrong and ideological, and
potentially really quite dangerous.
Great. So the book is again the invention of
prehistory, Empire, Violence and our obsession with human origins.
Of course, I'm leaving a link to it in
the description of the interview. And Doctor Ganus, just
before we go, apart from the book, where can
people find your work on the internet?
Oh, that's very kind of you. Um, I have
one website which is uh Stefanos-caulanos.com, in which most
of the rest of my work on, on history,
philosophy and history of uh neurophysiology and so on,
um, can be, can be found. But that's very
kind of you to us. Thank you.
Thank you. So, uh, thank you so much for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a great pleasure to talk with
Doctor Lobbs. Thank you so very much. I really
appreciate your, your interview and your questions as well.
Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Jonathan Labrant John Jasent and the
Samuel Corriere, Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus
Fran David Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego
Londono Correa. Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn
Pavlostaevskynalebaa medicine, Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza,
Julian Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca
Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David
Williams, the Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee
Junior, Old Heringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert
Gray, Zigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark
Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson,
Benjamin Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael
Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller,
Alexander Aubert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular
John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean
Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas
Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas
Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carlo Montenegroal Ni
Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers
Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank
you for all.